Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Errol Lane.
British-born author James P. Hogan has gained a reputation as one of the premier writers
of hard science fiction working today.
He's published seven novels so far, including In Here at the Stars, The Gentle Giants of
Gain-A-Meade, Giant Star, Thrice Upon a Time, The Two Faces of Tomorrow, and his latest
Voyage from yesteryear.
Hogan tells us how he became an author.
For
20 years, Hogan worked as a systems designer for computers, then sold computers to scientists
for use in their research.
Associating with scientists as he did, Hogan was exposed to all sorts of current scientific
research, and he would make use of his scientific context when he began to write seriously.
The chances were 10 to 1.
I had a customer specializing in that field, and I just had to, if I needed some background
information on a particular topic, I could almost guarantee I had a phone number in my
diary as a guy who could talk all day about it.
And they loved doing it, as well.
I used to call them, and they'd say, I'd like to come and talk to you tomorrow.
Well, we're a little busy, but what's it about?
Oh, I need some help with the book I'm working on.
Well, why didn't you say so?
What times do you want to show up?
I may talk all day.
I think this is one of the interesting sites of selling computers into this kind of area.
You can imagine some of these specialists, they talk to bacteria all day long or whatever,
and they end up shutting the back rooms of universities.
And maybe there are four people on the planet they can talk to who understand their language.
And sometimes they find it hard to believe that somebody from the world outside that
has walked in off the street is sincerely interested to sit down and talk to them.
And he's curious, and he wants to know what they're doing, wants to have it explained.
So, writing about his experiences with scientists, Hogan found that he was a science fiction writer.
I didn't particularly set out to be a science fiction writer.
I suppose I became one by accident.
I just always wanted to write and started writing stories about the little bit of life
that I'd had some personal experience of, and was told I was a science fiction writer,
and I said, how's that?
And they said, well, the publisher is publishing it under their science fiction imprint,
so we guess you have to be.
So I said, OK.
And it kind of started out like that.
Hogan's books are scientifically accurate and highly realistic.
He's been called the man who put science back into science fiction.
Next time we'll talk to James P. Hogan about some of his novels.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
James P. Hogan's 1977 science fiction novel, Inherit the Stars, should be required reading
for anyone who demands scientific accuracy in an exciting narrative.
The book takes place some 50 years in the future.
A skeleton inside a space suit is found on the moon.
That's interesting enough, but what follows is even more provocative.
The skeleton is a human one, and it's been on the moon for 50,000 years.
The scientific unraveling of this mystery forms the basis of the novel.
It's like a detective story, and Hogan talks about the origins of the idea.
2001 was one of the factors that inspired me to write Inherit the Stars.
I loved the idea of something being found, a mystery, being uncovered in the course of
lunar exploration that was sufficiently intriguing to motivate a lot of scientists into unraveling
it.
It seemed a good opportunity to set the scientific detective story that I wanted to write.
You know, okay, let's have the detective story, or the mystery that the detectives are trying
to solve hinge around something that's turned up on the moon.
Well, dead bodies are always pretty good for detective stories.
It ought to be a more interesting dead body than the standard detective thriller.
So let's make it 50,000 years old in human, which raises the whole, opens up the whole
bag of words, and let's just see how they unravel that.
I wanted the ending to be a bit of a twist, a bit unexpected, a bit of a surprise, but
nevertheless plausible and rational within the context of the story.
I didn't want to bring in mystical agencies or strange laws of physics or anything like
this to hold it together.
The entire scientific community of Earth starts to work on the baffling problem of the space-suited
50,000-year-old human skeleton, which they name Charlie.
They soon find remnants on the moon of Charlie's culture, a map of an unfamiliar planet, scraps
of Charlie's diary in an unfamiliar language, and some technological artifacts.
With such clues, the scientists begin to piece together the incredible story of who Charlie
was and why he was human.
Hogan says the book sort of defines what science is all about.
It counters some of the distorted images of scientists Hogan has seen in fiction.
Scientists were always eccentric and they wore odd colored shoes and they drew cabbages
that ate people and they wanted to conquer the world or something.
And there are these cute public impressions of scientists as people who run down the street
with no clothes on shouting Eureka.
Or you read phrases like it came to him in a flash and you read on and what came to him
in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next 20 years.
And real science, you know, there are insights, there are strokes of genius, but the overwhelming
bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes, a lot of people doing nothing really
dramatic or exciting but just meticulously sifting through details, collecting information.
For generations and for centuries, all different parts of the world.
And it's really like putting together a huge jigsaw puzzle, lots of people cutting out pieces
and pushing them around and every now and again somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner
and see that it fits with a huge chunk down there and that's a breakthrough.
And so it goes on.
And it really is a detective story.
I think it's a far more exciting one than most detective fiction.
We strongly recommend you read Inherit the Stars to find out the solution to the mystery surrounding Charlie.
Hogan wrote two sequels to Inherit the Stars and all three form a trilogy that presents an awesome view of man's origins.
Next time we'll talk with Hogan about those other two books.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
James P. Hogan's Science Fiction novel Inherit the Stars was popular enough with readers to justify a sequel, two of them in fact.
The first was entitled A Gentle Giant's of Ganymede and it was published in 1978.
Hogan explains why he wrote the book.
When I wrote Inherit the Stars I had three books in mind. I had a trilogy in mind.
So I put the hooks in, although Inherit the Stars was a complete story in itself, it didn't leave the reader hanging.
It started and told and finished a story.
Nevertheless, there were a couple of hooks in there that invited some questions, which were paved the way to a follow-up book.
And my thinking at the time was, I'll go that far, but I won't write the second book until I have some feedback as to how the readers liked the first one.
And I got a lot of mail and they all liked it and a lot of them said in their letters, will there be a follow-up?
They picked out the hooks.
So I wrote The Gentle Giant's.
The Gentle Giant's of the title are a race of aliens that first turned up in Inherit the Stars.
In that book, scientists from Earth had discovered a wrecked spaceship on Ganymede, one of Jupiter's huge moons.
And on it were the remains of prehistoric creatures from Earth, dinosaurs and the like.
In The Gentle Giant's of Ganymede, humans meet some live Ganymens who have returned to the solar system after a mishap in space kept them away for some 25 million years due to time dilation.
It turns out that the Ganymiens had been responsible for human evolution.
They'd taken primitive hominids from Earth 25 million years ago and moved them to a planet called Minerva.
Minerva was then one of the inner planets of our solar system, but it was destroyed in a tremendous war involving the human stock that had evolved from the Ganymien experiments.
The second book ends with the Ganymiens leaving the solar system in search of their own people, who migrated from Minerva millions of years before the war that destroyed the planet.
Hogan says readers wanted a third book.
And they wanted another one and I did have a trilogy in mind when I wrote it.
And the third one in that series is now written. It's called Giant Star and it will be, it's a July title.
So it should start to appear in the bookstores around June.
It's the third and last. There won't be any more in that series.
So it ties up a few of the loose ends, tells another story.
It continues with the characters we met in the previous two books, both the terrestrial and the alien characters, and introduces some new ones.
And I don't think there can be a fourth one because it really, I don't think there's any more to be said. It wraps it all up.
Giant Star was published in 1981 and as Hogan said, it wraps up all the mysteries and loose ends raised in the first two books.
And it presents an absolutely breathtaking concept of man's origins, explaining also where man gets his curious nature, his aggressiveness, and his incredible instinct for survival.
Hogan talks about the underlying purpose of the whole trilogy.
Basically it was an attempt to depict science as it is, or at least as I perceive it.
And at the same time we've got into a story that people who were non-scientists, non-specialists would find stimulating and arousing for the curiosity,
even if, you know, without trying to turn it into a 250 page lab report or something like that.
And stimulating the books certainly are. For sheer grandeur, the whole Minervan trilogy, as some have called it, is matched by a few other works in the field of science fiction.
Isaac Asimov's Foundation trilogy comes to mind as a comparison, as does Olaf Stapledon's Odd John.
James B. Hogan's Inherit the Stars, the General Giants of Ganymede, and Giant Star. Contemporary science fiction has little to offer that's any better.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Time travel is one of the traditional themes of science fiction.
One of the best, certainly one of the most realistic time travel books, is James Hogan's Thrice Upon a Time, which came out in 1980.
But for some time, for a number of years, in fact, before I wrote Thrice Upon a Time, I'd been wanting to write a time travel book for a number of reasons.
Firstly, I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes, the logical paradoxes, once and for all, and answer them, without top-outs, without convenient coincidences, and without obliging characters who just happened to do the right thing to make everything come out the way the author said.
Secondly, I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some kind of a conjurer's box, described or disguised as whatever, that you jump into and you jump out of and you're in some other time.
We seem too many conjurers' boxes and it seemed to me unrealistic. If I ever build a box like that and I thought it was going to take me to another time, I certainly would jump into it and press the button.
I would conduct a long series of tests and experiments first and none of that here I've ever seen to do this.
Hogan wanted to avoid some of the cliches or formulas that characterized most time travel stories.
I think in too many stories, time machines are used like starships. They're just a device, a vehicle, to get some characters into an unusual environment and then tell a pretty routine story that would stole them from Greek mythology or European medieval history.
The technology doesn't come into the story at all. They could have gone the on a greyhound bus. I didn't want to do that.
The story was about some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon and had realized that if what they were seeing meant what they thought it meant, it meant that they could actually inject information into the past and change the past, with all the questions that it implies.
And proceeded to test this phenomenon and obtained some very, very strange results.
The strange thing the physicists learn is that they can send messages into the past, not far into the past, maybe just 10 minutes.
I didn't want it to be a million years or a billion years or some huge span of time where really nothing that you did could make any difference.
How about a lab bench experiment? 10 minutes. You can just send a little signal back to yourself 10 minutes ago and change what you've already done.
This is interesting. You're hard up against the paradoxes now. You can't find a way around them or duck them. You've got to answer the question, what happens?
The logic of the whole situation becomes absolutely, it drives you to the point of insanity trying to figure it out.
It was the logic and the science implied by the time travel theme that fascinated Hogan. He wanted to approach the concept realistically.
And it's so realistic that you feel after reading the book, you could go down to Radio Shack and buy the parts to make a time travel machine.
Recently, a number of responsible scientists have been speculating on the actual possibility of time travel.
We asked Hogan if he thought it would ever be a reality and if his book was meant to be prophetic.
Well, I don't know whether it's prophetic or not. Well, as is elaborated in the book itself, if something like that ever became a fact,
there are some pretty interesting problems that are going to have to be solved and our ideas of logic and cause and effect are going to have to undergo some pretty interesting revisions.
So I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet saying yes, it will happen. Maybe, I don't know.
I think history has shown that impossible or it will never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any context.
More with James P. Hogan next time.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Of all science fiction writers working today, no one surpasses James P. Hogan in scientific accuracy and realism.
Hogan's publisher, Ballantine Books, has advertised him as the man who put science back in science fiction.
And after reading books like Thrice Upon a Time and The Two Faces of Tomorrow, you realize how much he deserves that description.
Hogan is also concerned with realism, with the kind of everyday detail that makes his story even though it's set in the future, a totally believable one.
He explains why realistic detail is important.
I'm not sure if he's going to get it if he needs to render CAD.
These matter because if the story is being told in the future, the whole of the background has to be consistently futuristic.
I've come across a number of instances which in my opinion are a little flawed because I've dealt with an AW.
A writer may have seized on a particular thought, maybe a new scientific idea or a machine or whatever,
and developed that very well, but kind of gets hung up on it.
And in the background, everything else that's going on hasn't changed since 1980.
And trying to, I think, just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to think about a situation.
The guy's going to make a phone call just like stop and think how he might make that.
And think about it for five minutes and then maybe show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to do in the first couple of seconds.
Hogan says that his readers appreciate his attention to realistic detail and accuracy.
In fact, he thinks he attracts some readers who don't normally read science fiction because of it.
From the people who write to me and the people that I meet, one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is that
it is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science fiction reader who buys anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the bookstores.
But a lot of, I suppose, people who might be termed younger professional people in their late 20s, 30s, 40s,
in all manner of professions, not necessarily to do with the scientists, teachers, lawyers, doctors, so forth,
who typically would say, gee, I used to read science fiction when I was at college or when I was at university, but I kind of grew out of it.
I can't relate the way out galaxies light years away anymore or aliens running around with ray guns.
Today I have a family, a career, a mortgage, my feet are solidly on the surface of this planet.
But they seem to like stories that don't kind of try and take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now,
but maybe just stretch the future 20 or 30 years.
I may find names in the book like IBM and Avis and Boeing, familiar places, and it kind of grabs them.
They say, well, this I can relate to, it's the world that I live in just stretched a little bit.
The connection is not broken, the economics and the politics have evolved from what I read in the papers, I can still see the connections.
And it could be the world my kids go up in, and I like it.
Hogan's latest novel, Voyage from yesteryear, is further in the future than his other books, and the field of action is much broader,
but it's typically Hogan and his credibility.
If you haven't been exposed to James P. Hogan's brand of science fiction, you're missing something.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.